Daniel Jones. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
I'm talking to Nathaniel Jones,
he runs image resizing.net. He's
got a really great application
and module that you can
pop into your asp.net application
to make image resizing simpler.
And I recently did a
blog post on a called
back to basics talking about
HTP modules and servers. And
as with all great things
on my blog, the great
things are in the comments.
I think that the comments
that Nathaniel put in were
much more interesting than my
post itself. So I wanted
to have you on the
show. Thanks for chatting with
me. Thank you, Scott honor,
to be here. My pleasure.
So we were just talking
actually, before we started the
show and you, you immediately
kind of launched this as
really interesting information. You said
that most of the imagery
sizing code on the net
is just kind of copy
pasted and it might be
wrong, Unfortunate and true. There's
been a lot of really
good coders write a lot
of blog articles about imagery
sizing, probably more like 75
to 90 articles. I still
haven't found one that wasn't
buggy in some way, the
best article out there is
one that actually does it
in code JPEGs quality, for
example, which will give you
really big file sizes. It's
not really web appropriate because
the difference between say it's
not visually perceptible in a
web browser, and you'd have
to have really sharp lines
in there to be able
to tell the difference. I
did a blog post where
I was encoding some graphics
on the fly. I would
basically make a bitmap and
make an image. And then
I saved it. I said
that mapped out, save response,
that output stream. And I
went to a PNG and
you made a really great
comment in the, in the
comments. I still need to
update the blog post that
I was doing that wrong.
The GDI P and G.
And most of the time,
I believe that for simple
enough sequence line art, for
example, a small enough that
it's, it never gets through
the buffer and actually has
to seek on the underlying
strength. Cause it cause those
streams are wrapped in an
interface which has a buffer
between calm and.net. So, you
know, for us really small
P and G it, you
won't have to see a
problem because it'll either be
small enough to fit in
that buffer or simple enough
that it, the compression never
even has to really kick
in, you know, basically a
runtime LinkedIn coding scenario, but
for like photographic PNG, you
really have to have a
speakable stream, which means you
have to write to a
memory stream, seek back to
buy one, and then write
that memory stream back to
the output stream because the
asp.net response stream, it doesn't
support seeking even in dotnet
for. I see. So I
was saying graphics from image.
I was drawing onto the
graphics object and then I
just said saved output streams.
That was like a right
a right only, you can
only go forward on an
output stream cause you're streaming
that out to the browser.
And that works with JPEGs
because you can do that
in one pass, but you're
saying P and G is
need to move forward and
backward in order to do
that right. Is that right?
Do they need to move
forward and backward? They just
need to go to the
beginning again, is it a
two pass operation? It probably,
it depends on the implementation.
There's a lot of different
ways to encode PNGs. Some
are more efficient, some are
less efficient. I'm not sure
what GDI is. Algorithm is
not really, exactly documented. Yeah.
We're trying to learn. He's
got some really great articles
where he talks about the
different ways to do JPEG
and PNG and coding. On
the, on the server side,
I've noticed internally at Microsoft,
we still haven't kind of
got official support for using
system dot drawing in a
web context. And there's all
sorts of warnings on MSDN
that say, you shouldn't do
this and you shouldn't do
that. I honestly don't expect
that sport to ever arrive
because of the amount of
pitfalls there are with it.
You can use system dot
drawing in a perfect manner,
but you're definitely not going
to achieve that by copying
and pasting code even. So
that's why, I mean, if
you can't, it's so complicated
and difficult error prone to
use system dot drawing that
there's no way Microsoft could
support it. In my opinion,
you know, I, I believe
the official statement is that
the WPF isn't supported either
on the server and unlike
system dot drawing that requires
full trust. The only drawing
API, I know that Microsoft
still supports is WIC, which
is only available. You know,
the, the server safe version
is only available on a
windows server, 2008, release two
and up cause that's the
version that's free threaded, server's
safe. And you know, you
have to work through a
common interface to do that,
but you do get great
performance. What would help me
understand this? I mean, many,
many, many years ago, 10
years ago when Dominic's first
started out, I was doing
banking software and I was
processing check images on the
service side. And we did
this for years. Never had
a problem. What, and I'm
have no doubt that the
listeners are kind of thinking
why I'm using systems not
drawing. And I'm using the
graphics context and making images
dynamically. Millions of people are
doing that. What are the
pitfalls? When, when, when would
we see them? Because to
hear that it's totally unsupported
and not something we should
do, but everyone's doing it
anyway. And it probably will
work is a kind of
a confusing thing to reconcile.
And that's, that's, that's a
big topic. There was a
clarification article. I don't know
if I link to it
on your blog or not,
but it explained that it's
not that it won't work
and it's not that it
won't be stable. It's just
that you won't get support.
If you call Microsoft. I
going, that's what it comes
down to is it's, it's
one of those things. That's
just one of those situations,
those cans of worms that
are not Microsoft deems, not
worth trying to support. So
if you're generating imagery, there's
fewer pitfalls and say, if
you're loading, you know, a
10 megapixel camera image and
processing it, you're dealing with
a lot less memory, make
it pixels matter because when
you decompress that 500 kilobyte
JPEG, it might be 50
megabytes of memory. And to
decompress it, you have to
allocate all that contiguous amount
of space. So if you
are not handling your memory
management properly, then you know,
50 megabytes per image D
code that can stack up
really fast. And then the
biggest, biggest problem with using
system dot drawing is that
garbage collection is not implemented.
When I say not implemented.
I mean that the.net, the
CLR, it doesn't know how
big those sites, those images
are a bitmap to the
CLR. It's one or two
kilobytes. You know, if you've
got a lot of metadata,
maybe, you know, a hundred
kilobytes, it's tiny little object,
it's, you know, the size
of a big string. You
know, it's not on the
high priority list for this
disposal. So you can have,
you know, if you know,
much smaller objects are getting
garbage collected, first those 50
megabyte objects will just stay
around forever, especially under high
load. There's a to dispose
or not dispose. That's one
gigabyte question off often restaurant
reference blog post on that
issue. Maybe we can add
a list of links or
something. If you have a
list of valuable links or
things that people need to
see, then we'll add them
all to the show notes.
So basically if you aren't
putting your GDI object and
a using clause, it's not
going to get disposed reliably
and calling dot dispose on
it is also not reliable
because GDI has a lot
of different exceptions. It'll just
happen for lots of reasons
like running out of memory.
You can't control all the
situations in which GDI will
throw an exception, you know,
say a user uploads, an
image, which is corrupt, you
know, and, you know, you
have an exception before the
dot dispose line that isn't
going to get garbage collected.
And so it's really critical
that you either place you
place your dispose statements and
using clauses by using a
using clause or putting in
a try finally block because
in a bad scenario, you
know, you're going to have
exceptions and those exceptions are
going to trigger more exceptions
because you're now going to
be having a memory leak.
So it's really critical. Don't
call dot suppose use a
finally block or a using
clause. And that's everything in
system dot drawing, which implements
disposable like encoder parameters, image,
attributes, stuff that is acts
like a structure yet it's
actually allocating unmanaged memory. You
know, it's unlikely that it'll
cause a server crash as
quickly as not disposing a
bitmap or image instance, but
it's still subject to the
same problems with garbage collection.
So are you saying that
we should use the using,
which does try catch finally
and we should never call
dispose directly? Or are you
saying we shouldn't use, you're
using You if you nest
using clauses that that works
too, but some scenario sometimes
you need your, your code
flow in such a way
you need a little more
control, like checking if it's
no before disposing it. And
so you can do that
in a try finally, just
make sure that you nest
you're inside a finally block.
If you dispose one object
that disposed call can fail.
So make sure inside that's
another try finally block, you
know, and inside that finally
block is the next disposed
statement. I see. So you're
really saying that when you
start doing this kind of
work, particularly around loading images,
that you can't trust anything,
you should be as defensive
a coder, as you can
be. Absolutely. And on top
of this, assuming the garbage
collection did work properly, consistency
and throughput is a lot
more important on a server
than a response time for
a single request. And what,
what, what I mean by
that is no manual memory
management is, should be applied.
Even if you have automatic
memory management and your language
when you're dealing with large
objects like this, you know,
if you have, if you're,
you know, for example, resizing
a standard compact camera, JPEG
10, 10, 10 megapixel, you're
allocating, you know, probably about
40 megabytes of Ram, where
to load the image and
then say, we're resizing it
to five megapixels. And so
we're gonna need 20 megapixels
of space allocated for that
20 megabytes. So you end
up with 60 megabytes of
space, plus any temporary buffers
you need. So a single
request can use a lot
of Ram and it's important
that you dispose that as
early as possible waiting for
garbage collection to do its
thing is just a really
bad idea if you want
a consistency. And Because now
that might sound like a
lot of Ram, but it
kind of is swell. It
kind of swells up. It
does its work and then
it goes away. I mean,
it is okay for the
CPU to do work, right?
That's what, it's what it's
there for. But I'm hearing
you say for scale and
throughput, you want to do
that work and get out
of there as fast as
you can. So sure. Allocate
the memory, allocate the least
amount you can, but the
second that you don't need
it anymore, let it go.
Right? So that someone else
can use it, Right? Because
even an ideal garbage collector
struggles with large, large blob
objects, it's especially, underload because
it's the most optimal time
to just to get rid
of that Ram under load
when you have large objects
is immediately. And so, you
know, the garbage collection is
never going to be as
optimal is doing it right
now. You know, a lot
garbage collection is a performance
optimization for small objects, but
not for large ones, I
guess that's the best way
to sum it up. That
is a really good way
to remind people that, I
mean, it's a convenience, it's
a friendly thing to have
around. It's great when you're
dealing with small amounts of
memory and you want to
not think about them, but
if you're dealing, if you're
dealing with something that you
know is megabytes, even though
the garbage collector is your
partner in that ultimately when
you put in a using
or you start using disposes
appropriately, you're not just giving
hints, but you're being really
explicit about that memory management,
as much as you can
because you know, more than
the garbage collector And it's
really flying blind when it
comes to unmanaged objects, you
know, it's very hard to
inform the garbage collector about
how much memory and unmanaged
objects using and when it's
best to dispose it and
all that stuff. And with
WPF, they did a much
better job of that, but
it's still difficult and still
slightly flawed. Yeah. Well, I
think that that was a
big deal early on. I
mean, when Donna came out
2001, 2002, three in there,
I remember that we were
all talking about that relationship
between the unmanaged code and
the managed code. And it
was, it was all, it
always came up when you
were in the dotnet one,
one kind of world, you
were always remembering that I'm
using a system dot whatever,
but that's really a handle
to some unmanaged because there
was this bridge between the
manage world, the unmanaged world,
and then now fast forward
10 years. And there's so
many convenience functions in so
many easy ways and easy
libraries to do work. I
think that maybe newer people,
younger people, people who are
just getting into.net forget that,
that these unmanaged blobs that
are kind of fronted by
managed Trendly libraries still exist
in that you really can't
count on the garbage collector
to know everything about that
world. Yeah. I, it seems
like everybody on, at least
on stack overflow, they have,
they don't even realize it's
unmanaged. It's this constant it's
constant thing. That's like every
single time, there's a question
or post about managed dot
memory and system dot drawing.
There's these people arguing that
the garbage collector is going
to take care of it
because it's, you know, it's
handled, but it's not. This
actually brings up an interesting
opportunity to pivot the conversation
because one of the other
things I thought was great
about your comments was that
you point out kind of
when managed code is appropriate
and when it's not. And
you say that IIS is
way more efficient than asp.net.
That's stir, that's serving static
files from the disc. And
we should dig into that
a little bit because the,
the, the, the blog posts
that I blogged about was
trying to get people to
turn off this feature called
Ram far Ram, far as
our a M M F
a R run, all managed
modules for all requests. And
basically it's this feature that
was turned on in order
to enable ASP early, early
versions of asp.net, MVC, and
routing. And it's no longer
required. It's really, there's really
just no good reason to
do it. But the ramifications
of running all managed modules,
running managed code for every
single request is huge, particularly
around images and JavaScript and
CSS. And you had a
lot of good opinions about
that. Static files are a
completely different problems scenario than
logic and managed code of
static file serving as a
highly competitive area, because there's
so many ways to do
it. In an ideal scenario,
you have one thread per
virtual core on your server.
And for serving files, you
use an event loop because
you can, you don't need
those threads. And tried switching
is expensive. You can handle
an unlimited number of requests
if the number of requests
doesn't matter because you're not
allocating stuff for it. You
know, it's a queue and
you have no threat overhead,
no switch overhead, nothing. It's
just incredible. Now I a
seven, I have six, nine,
five, not so much, but
I, a seven is a
really great server for static
files. When you don't have
ASP on that enabled, it's
definitely competitive with anything else
on the windows platform. It
uses the HTTP SIS Colonel
level code to do this,
doing it in user spaces.
Not really, you know, you,
you take a, a threefold
hit performance hit. If you
try to, you know, serve
a static files or any
kind of files and user
space, that's kind of the,
the performance bottleneck on windows
there. When you've got three
to three levels there. I
mean, I know that I
did a lot of work
teaching. You know, you can
basically teach HTP dot SIS
what you want it to
do. You can, you can
make sure that, you know,
kernel mode caching is on.
And that means that a
port can open up a
TCP connection can be connected,
and you can have all
that work happen in the
kernel. And a file can
be returned without hopping out
into, into userspace. And then
from userspace hopping into managed
code. So you've got that
threefold hit jumping out of
the kernel, and then another
couple of orders of magnitude
to jump into manage code
and, and serve a file
from asp.net itself. Exactly. And
when you lit lit MVC
or a spin on that
service, it's, it can actually
be worse than that, because
in addition to all the,
all those overheads it's going,
if it tries to serve
it from managed code, it's
going to allocate either a
buffer or allocate for the
entire file per user downloading
the file. And that's, what's
important because if you, if
you buffer the entire file
into memory to serve it
to a client, your scalability
is gone. You can't, you
can't scale that, you know,
I hate to get off
topic here. Back in 2007,
I was doing a content
management system based on the
speed on it too. And
I was using virtual path
providers. It turned out that
back then, if there was
any virtual path providers enabled,
it would switch to managed
code for serving static files.
And they fixed that. They
actually, I reached out to
Scott Guthrie and Thomas, I think
it's Mark Marquardt. I can't
pronounce his last name, but
he, they got it. They
rewrote the static file handler
based on my request and
got a, really, a really
decent managed implementation of static
file hundreds on, and also
made it, so that, that,
that code path would only
take effect on a virtual
file. Not just anyone was
registered. So it was much
more efficient after that hotfix.
And I believe that was
included in dotnet service back
to Early, early on. This
was a while back, Right?
But the net result of
that, that, that problem was
that there'd be a a
hundred megabyte MP3 file being
served to the client. And
after eight, eight clients downloading
it, the server would crash
at eight because it was
getting buffered into memory and
a 32 bit process. You
know, you don't have much
room to work with maybe
about 1200 megabytes. So Right
now this is low level
stuff that we're talking about
here. And we don't want
to, I mean, I don't
want to get people panicked
about, like, we're saying that
you get this many times
worst performance and this and
that. This is less about
asp.net being lousy at a
particular task, as it is
about. Like, it's almost like
comparing C-sharp to assembler what
we're, what I'm saying. I
think what you're saying is
that there are tools for
the job. And if you
want to serve static files
from a disc, you do
that with IAS. You don't
do that, right. Or you
segment it. I'm really fond
of making your static files
and your dynamic files run
separate run on separate software.
The easiest way to do
that is with edge caching,
because you can basically just
have a reverse proxy of
your static files. And then
it doesn't matter that much,
but ideally you put, you
put your static files, one
place on it on software,
that's optimized for static files,
and you put your dynamic
and all your, just your
dynamic requests, which is just
your HTML and your XML,
your Ajax stuff that goes
through a server that does
just that. And that's the
best. And it, and it
doesn't matter if it's asp.net,
Ruby on rails, whatever the
platform is, that's the best
architecture because your, your, your
smarts server, your dynamic server
can be optimized for being
dynamic and smart. Your static
server can be optimized for
doing that, trying to do
both on the same, same
website. It's not possible. You
can get a compromise, but
it limits your optimization And,
and segmenting. Like that seems
like such a, an obvious
thing, but you'd be surprised
how few people do it.
And it just has to
do with just general segmenting,
kind of a very, very
brief, but funny story from
the, I want to say
the late nineties, I was
working@eighthundred.com and we came up
with this. It was, there
was like best buy. They
got bought by best buy.
I think actually in the
end, they had this deal
where they said three DVDs
for a dollar. And this,
this ratio that we had
been so comfortable with, of
99% of people browsing, and
a 1% of people checking
out of our shopping cart
changed and it switched. And
suddenly everyone had got their
three DVDs, but they wanted
to give us money. And
our shopping cart implementation didn't
scale. The whole application flipped
on its side and had
we segmented it into browsing,
which was read mostly and
purchasing, which was right. Mostly
we would have been fine,
but we ended up having
to segment it kind of
on the fly. And that
basic segmenting thing almost 15
years ago, you know, saved
our butts. Even though we
had to do it on
the fly, I'm surprised how
few people do it. They'll
put something in the cloud,
but they won't have their
images on their own DNS.
And they won't have their
images served by a CDN.
And they won't segment the
product catalog from the checkout
process. It's, it's attractive to,
for organization to have everything
in one place, you know,
but it's possible to segment
without, without destroying your organization
and basically to do that.
You really need a reverse
proxy. And Microsoft has a
reverse proxy in the form
of ISIS server. There's also
engine X, you know, cloud
front. So reverse proxy and
Application requests, rousing writing in
IAS as a reverse proxy.
I've heard of that, but
I haven't used it myself.
Well, maybe say something about
what a reverse proxy is.
I don't know if it
necessarily, everyone is familiar with
that concept, A reverse proxy
people probably everybody's familiar with
a proxy, which is a
caching proxy is, is a
proxy that will take local
copies of commonly requested content
like microsoft.com, et cetera, and
send it back so that
the, you know, usually the
corporate internet connection doesn't get
overloaded so much. A reverse
proxy is a proxy that's
right next to that application.
It sits there. And everybody
who tries to get to
that application goes through it
and it caches what the
application sends out. And so
the application doesn't have to
do the same work over
and over again, and it
can use HTTP level caching
because HTTP level caching is
a lot more efficient and
a lot more scalable than
application level caching. You can
load balance among a lot
of, a lot of edge
caching solutions, more easily, a
lot of edge caching servers,
more easily. You're using HTTP
stateless a lot easier. And
you can optimize for the
HTTP protocol versus application specific
caching, headers and stuff like
that. That's a really important
thing to remember. I mean,
people will do what they
think is caching, which means
they'll throw something into the
asp.net cash object and put
a little, if not, null
check around it, and they'll
say, all right, I've done
my caching. Now you're laughing.
You're making it gonna make
our listeners feel bad. But
I think the point is,
as we, as we talk
about scaling, do as little
as possible and HTP level
caching is a way of,
you know, all that's, all
the stuff like E tags.
And if you know it
last modified and all that
stuff, that's all built into
it to HTTP. And few
people will take advantage of
that and be smart about
that. You just don't want
to be serving anything that
you don't have.net doesn't handle
The HTTP protocol as well
as an edge caching solution.
Well, you know, ID tags
and all that stuff, it's
a lot of complexity. And
so it's not there for
a reason, but it's easy
to add at HTTP caching
level really easy. And so,
you know, you don't need
to accept range of support
and all this stuff. It
can be handled by the,
by the, the cash solves
a wide range of problems
that, that you have when
you're trying to communicate through
MVC or web forms, whatever
it is, You bring up
a really interesting point about
HTTP handlers. And you talk
about the ability to delegate
work back into AIS. And
this is a really significant
because I want people to
understand the relationship between HTP
dot SIS IIS and asp.net
as we move our way
up, farther into application code.
But as you, as you
make those transitions, as you
transitioned from AIS into asp.net,
there's a brief, brief opportunity
for you to delegate work
back to IIS. Can you
talk about that? Yes. It's,
it's not too brief, but
it's a really brief if
you want to take advantage
of authorization and authentication after
post authorized request, you can't
send work back to I
S because it's already marked
for processing by the manager
and time. So for example,
even in beginning request, you
could call a HTTP context
dot rewrite path, and you
can say, okay, I want
this request to go here
instead. And that's how that's
how URL rewriting is implemented.
It's it's with, with rewrite
path. And it's this invisible
thing. It's not a redirect,
it's a invisible rewrite of
what, of that request that
came into another path and
other query string. However, if
you want to get authorization
authentication for the original URL,
first, you have to do
it in post authorize request.
Cause that's after authentications already
happened after authorizations already happened.
And what that does is
if you use that, that
event handler, you can allow
a URL, authentic URL or
authorization to take effect, to
protect resources, and then rewrite
the result to either, you
know, the  image without
exposing, you know, private files
to the internet. If you
wait until process or the
process request stage, which is
were an action result, executes
a we're an HTTP handler
executes, anything implementing HTTP handler.
If you call that you
won't, the request is already
being handled by us beyond
that, you can't send it
back to iOS seven and
there's certain service packs in
which it works and certain
than it doesn't, but in
the latest version, it does
it. So basically you just
can't do it, especially if
you want to have a
same deployment scenario. I mean,
how much do you recommend
that people look at that?
I mean, it should, should
we be looking for optimizations
where we can bail out
of M and a managed
module and delegate work back?
Or is that something that's
more complicated than it's worth?
Basically, my advice is don't
use routes for static content
use URL, rewriting it's, it's
your URL rewriting is way
more powerful than ASP on
that route, which is also
why it's intimidating. But if
you haven't already learned a
little bit about regular expressions,
they're really powerful tool. There's
something every developer needs to
learn about some time, and
it's better to make the
jump earlier than later, because
if you wait, like I
did and learn them later,
you'll go back and look
at those thousands and thousands
of lines of harnessing code
and replace them with a
single line of regexes and
hit yourself on the head
with a baseball bat or
something for your own stupidity.
It's really a really great
time saver for I was
there. I did that. I've
had entire programs that could
have been handled by a
couple of lines of wretched,
regular expressions, but you're a
rewriting we'll call it rewrite
rewrite path early enough to
where I S handled things.
So the scenario in which
you call rewrite path manually
is like, for example, an
imagery sizing.net project, where you're
doing this caching, you know,
you have to do a
little bit of processing to
determine what file it goes
to, and which in our
case is we build a
hash of the modified data,
the source file, the URL
and the query string. We
hashed that, and that determines
where the file gets cashed.
Now hash is a pretty
efficient operation. So there's very
little time spitting manage space,
but without that, there's no
way to implement authorization authentication
and to support those and
that. And that's important because
all this stuff we talked
about reverse proxy is great
for public static content, but
private static content is a
more challenging problem. And that's
where you need, you need
to do this kind of
thing because there's no other,
you know, if your application
is the only serve as
the only layer that has
access to authentication authorization information,
it's the only layer in
which you can implement a
caching for that for protected
files. Well, this is really,
this is really, really useful
information. And all of this
is built up over your
experience, building your, your product,
which is the imagery sizing.net
library. And you've got lots
of good information up there
that people can check out.
And just to be clear
to the, to the listener,
I, I reached out to
Nathaniel and I talking about
his, his product, because I
think it's amazing and awesome.
And I've talked about it
before the blog. He's not
an advertiser. This is just
me Scott saying that this
is a rocking awesome library.
He's got a really, really
great license for both open
source and commercial. And you
can even talk to Nathaniel
and have him look at
your architecture for a very
reasonable for feet reasonable fee.
And you can check out
all of his content up
at image, resizing.net. And we'll
put that in the show
notes as well. I really
appreciate you sitting down and
talking with me today. This
is a huge topic. We
could probably go for another
couple of shows. We might
want to do that in
a couple of weeks and
dig even deeper, dig even
deeper into maybe the cloud
and web farms. It's a
really, really big topic. It's
hard to cover it quickly.
It sure is. Well, I
appreciate the overview and, and
thanks for coming on the
show. Thank you, Scott. Appreciate
it. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.